software_development/aws_certified_solutions_architech/simple_storage_service.md, before:

# Simple Storage Service

Simple Storage Service, also known as S3, is an object-based **storage** service, in here we don't have to worry about file systems nor disk space for storing our files.

## What is Object Storage?

> Object storage is a data storage architecture which manages data as objects.

Other storage architectures are:

* File Systems which manage data as files in a hierarchy.
* Block Storage which manage data as blocks within sectors as tracks.

The biggest benefit provided by S3 is **unlimited storage**, where we don't need to worry about the infrastructure to support our storage needs.

In here we will find two key components:

* S3 Object: These contain our data, they are similar to regular files, and they contain the following properties.
    * Key: The name of the object.
    * Value: The data itself.
    * Version ID: Used for versioning our object, it is only used when versioning is enabled.
    * Metadata: Any additional information attached to the object.
* S3 Bucket: Buckets hold objects, you could consider them as top level directories, which may hold other subdirectories which may also hold objects. S3 is a universal namespace, so **buckets need a universal name**.

**Important:** An object may store 0 up to 5 Terabytes of data.

## Storage Classes

Storage classes could be considered as a storage tier for our buckets, this allows us to save up costs based on our storage needs.

1. Standard (default): 
    * Fast with a 99.99% availability
    * [11 9's durability](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/storage-data-transfer/understanding-cloud-storage-11-9s-durability-target)
    * Data is replicated across 3 _availability zones_
* Intelligent Tiering.
    * Uses machine learning to determine an appropriate class based on our object's usage. 
* Standard Infrequently Accessed (IA)
    * Still fast.
    * Cheaper **if you access files less than a month**.
    * An additional retrieval free is applied when we access our data.
    * Cost is 50% cheaper than the standard class.
* One Zone IA
    * Still fast.
    * Object is only existent on a single availability zone, which means than durability is lower.
    * Availability is 99.5%.
    * A retrieval fee is applied.
    * 20% cheaper than Standard Infrequently Accessed (IA)
* Glacier
    * Used for **long term cold storage**
    * Retrieval of data could take several minutes, up to an hour.
    * A retrieval fee is also applied.
    * This is a very low-cost solution.
    * Is promoted as its own AWS service, but it is part of S3.
* Glacier Deep Archive: 
    * Similar to Glacier but retrieval could take up to **12 hours**.
    * The cheapest option.

By comparing all the available classes we end up with the following chart.

| Feature                         | Standard | Intelligent Tiering | Standard IA | One-Zone IA | Glacier       | Glacier Deep Archive |
| ------------------------------- | -------: | -----------------:  | ----------: | ----------: | ------------: | -------------------: |
| Durability                      | 11 9’s   | 11 9’s              | 11 9’s      | 11 9’s      | 11 9’s        | 11 9’s               |
| Availability                    | 99.99%   | 99.99%              | 99.90%      | 99.50%      | N/A           | N/A                  |
| Availability SLA                | 99.99%   | 99.00%              | 99.00%      | 99.00%      | N/A           | N/A                  |
| AZ's                            | > 3      | > 3                 | > 3         | 1           | > 3           | > 3                  |
| Min. Capacity charge per object | N/A      | N/A                 | 128 KB      | 128 KB      | 40 KB         | 40 KB                |
| Min. Storage duration charge    | N/A      | 30 Days             | 30 Days     | 30 Days     | 90 days       | 180 days             |
| Retrieval fee                   | N/A      | N/A                 | Per GB      | Per GB      | Per GB        | Per GB               |
| First byte latency              | ms       | ms                  | ms          | ms          | mins to hours | hours                |

Key takeaways:

* One one-zone IA there should be lowered durability since there is a single point of failure, this value could actually refer to the infrastructure where our data is stored.
* We won't put an availability % on Glacier since retrieving content is so slow.
* First byte latency refers to how fast we can retrieve data from S3.

S3 Guarantees:

* The platform is build with 99.99% availability.
* Amazon guarantees 99.9 availability.
* Amazon guarantees 11'9s of durability.

## S3 Security

When we create a new bucket, they are all **private by default** and AWS really promotes not exposing buckets. Logging per request can be enabled in order to know which objects are being accessed and uploaded into our bucket, though logs are stored in a separate bucket. In S3 there are two security solutions:

* Access Control Lists: This is a legacy feature, though it's not deprecated, this is a very simple way for granting access to an object say public access or just read and write permissions.
* Bucket Policies: This is a more complex way of setting access policies since we need to write these policies into a JSON file.

### S3 Encryption

When we upload files to S3, we are using **SSL/TLS** by default, this means we have encryption for traffic between our local host and S3, for **Server Side Encryption** or SSE (this encrypts the data itself) there are a few options.

* SSE-AES: A 256 byte in length to be used in encryption, this is completely handled by S3.
* SSE-KMS or Key Managed: Keys are encrypted with another key, these keys can be managed by AWS or by us.
* SSE-C or Customer Provided: We provide the keys ourselves.

We can also encrypt our own files before uploading them to AWS, which is known as **Client Side Encryption**.

## S3 Data Consistency

When we put or write data to S3, which happens when we create new objects, the consistency is going to be different when we overwrite or delete objects.

### New Objects (PUTS)

When we send new data to S3 as a new object it's going to be *Read After Write* Consistency, this means that when upload a new S3 object we are immediately able to read the data, and it's going to be consistent.

### Overwrite (PUTS) or Delete Objects (DELETES)

When we overwrite or delete an existing object we deal with *Eventual Consistency*, which means that it takes time for S3 to replicate this changes to all AZ's, in this case, if we were to read the data after uploading it, S3 may return an old copy. We generally need to wait a few seconds before reading the new data.

## Cross Region Replication or CRR

When this feature is enable, any object that is uploaded will be **automatically replicated** to another region, this provides higher durability and disaster recovery for objects. 

![S3 CRR](https://i.imgur.com/Khd7xLV.png)

*Note:* It is also possible to copy an object into another S3 bucket in a separate account.

To enable CRR you must enable versioned on both the source and the destination buckets.

## Versioning

On S3 we can enable versioning on a bucket, this allows us to version our objects in order to prevent data loss and version tracking.

* Store all versions of an object in S3.
* Once enabled it cannot be disabled, only suspended.
* Fully integrates with S3's lifecycle rules.

![S3 Versioning](https://i.imgur.com/gVjullY.png)

*Note:* We are able to retrieve a specific object version.

## Lifecycle Management

This feature automates to process of moving objects between storage classes or deleting them completely. A simple use case would be:

* 7 days after uploading an object to S3 update an object class to the Glacier storage class, since we are unlikely to continue using it, this would save up on costs.
* 365 days after uploading an object to S3, remove it, since it's no longer needed.
 
![S3 Sample Lifecycle Rule](https://i.imgur.com/gVjullY.png)

## Transfer Acceleration

This feature provides us **fast and secure** transfer of files over long distances between end users and an S3 bucket, in here instead of uploading an object into an S3 bucket, you upload your data into a `distinct URL` for an **Edge Location** (a data center that is as close as possible). Once the data is uploaded the Edge Location, it is then forwarded through a specially optimized network (Amazon's backbone network)

![S3 Transfer Acceleration](https://i.imgur.com/rq2fw3i.png)

## Presigned URLs

This is a key feature when building web applications, this feature allows us to build a URL to provide temporary access to an object for either upload or download. These are commonly used to provide access to private objects, they can only be generated by the `AWS CLI` or the `AWS SDK`.

![S3 Presigned URL Example](https://i.imgur.com/79G7b5P.png)

## MFA Delete

To prevent other users from deleting our objects, we can enable MFA Delete which ensures users won't delete objects from a bucket unless they provide their MFA code. This feature may only be enabled if:

1. The AWS CLI is used to enable MFA.
2. The bucket must have versioning turned on.

```bash
aws s3api put-bucket-versioning \
    --bucket bucketname \
    --versioning-configuration Status=Enabled,MDADelete=Enabled \
    --mda "your-mda-serial-number mfa-code" \
```

*Note:* Only the bucket owner logged in as a Root user can delete objects from the bucket.

![S3 MFA](https://i.imgur.com/ygGpql3.png)

## Hands-On Key Takeaways

In order to make an object publicly accessible, you need to configure an ACL policy at `permissions > Bucket Policy > Edit`, here's a sample configuration for a single object.

```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "Allow object public access",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Principal": {
                "AWS": "*"
            },
            "Action": "s3:GetObject",
            "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::{bucket-name}/{objcet-path}"
        }
    ]
}
```

Versioning is a feature which cannot be turned off, only suspended, this means objects will still have a version history, but we won't be able to add new versions.

![S3 Enabling Versioning](https://i.imgur.com/IyxWFE3.png)

With versioning enabled, if we upload a new file with the same name as an existing object, S3 will detect it as a new version. The original version has no ID since versioning was disabled.

![S3 New Object Version](https://i.imgur.com/W3sXU6d.png)

When we upload a new file, they don't inherit the previous version's properties though our ACL does enable use to retrieve the latest version since the older versions have a `&version` query parameter on their path. We can also select a specific object version and delete it.

Server-side encryption only affect objects after it has been enabled, we will need to enable it on each pre-existing object, turning it on is a simple as visiting `Properties > Default Encryption > Edit`

![S3 Enable encryption](https://i.imgur.com/shU7ZaW.png)

## The AWS CLI for S3

The [AWS cli](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-welcome.html) enables us to interact with AWS'S services from the command line, before configuring it, make sure to create a [IAM User](https://console.aws.amazon.com/iamv2/home#/home) with programmatic access, then run `aws configure` and fill out the required inputs.

To list your available S3 Buckets use the following commands:

```bash
# List all the s3 buckets
$ aws s3 ls

2021-12-07 17:12:49 je12emy-csa-bucket

# Show the content at the root level for a given bucket
$ aws s3 ls je12emy-csa-bucket
                           PRE images/
# Show the content inside the folder 'images'
$ aws ls je12emy-csa-bucket/images/
2021-12-10 14:10:21          0
2021-12-10 16:37:53    2425730 space.png
2021-12-10 15:40:37     216708 vader.png
```

We can also move files from and into the bucket from s3.

```bash
# Download a file from S3
$ aws s3 cp s3://je12emy-csa-bucket/images/vader.png ~/Pictures/s3_vader.png
download: s3://je12emy-csa-bucket/images/vader.png to ../../Pictures/s3_vader.png
# Upload a file into S3
$ aws s3
```

Commit message:

Add handson section for moving objects in S3

software_development/aws_certified_solutions_architech/simple_storage_service.md, after:

# Simple Storage Service

Simple Storage Service, also known as S3, is an object-based **storage** service, in here we don't have to worry about file systems nor disk space for storing our files.

## What is Object Storage?

> Object storage is a data storage architecture which manages data as objects.

Other storage architectures are:

* File Systems which manage data as files in a hierarchy.
* Block Storage which manage data as blocks within sectors as tracks.

The biggest benefit provided by S3 is **unlimited storage**, where we don't need to worry about the infrastructure to support our storage needs.

In here we will find two key components:

* S3 Object: These contain our data, they are similar to regular files, and they contain the following properties.
    * Key: The name of the object.
    * Value: The data itself.
    * Version ID: Used for versioning our object, it is only used when versioning is enabled.
    * Metadata: Any additional information attached to the object.
* S3 Bucket: Buckets hold objects, you could consider them as top level directories, which may hold other subdirectories which may also hold objects. S3 is a universal namespace, so **buckets need a universal name**.

**Important:** An object may store 0 up to 5 Terabytes of data.

## Storage Classes

Storage classes could be considered as a storage tier for our buckets, this allows us to save up costs based on our storage needs.

1. Standard (default): 
    * Fast with a 99.99% availability
    * [11 9's durability](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/storage-data-transfer/understanding-cloud-storage-11-9s-durability-target)
    * Data is replicated across 3 _availability zones_
* Intelligent Tiering.
    * Uses machine learning to determine an appropriate class based on our object's usage. 
* Standard Infrequently Accessed (IA)
    * Still fast.
    * Cheaper **if you access files less than a month**.
    * An additional retrieval free is applied when we access our data.
    * Cost is 50% cheaper than the standard class.
* One Zone IA
    * Still fast.
    * Object is only existent on a single availability zone, which means than durability is lower.
    * Availability is 99.5%.
    * A retrieval fee is applied.
    * 20% cheaper than Standard Infrequently Accessed (IA)
* Glacier
    * Used for **long term cold storage**
    * Retrieval of data could take several minutes, up to an hour.
    * A retrieval fee is also applied.
    * This is a very low-cost solution.
    * Is promoted as its own AWS service, but it is part of S3.
* Glacier Deep Archive: 
    * Similar to Glacier but retrieval could take up to **12 hours**.
    * The cheapest option.

By comparing all the available classes we end up with the following chart.

| Feature                         | Standard | Intelligent Tiering | Standard IA | One-Zone IA | Glacier       | Glacier Deep Archive |
| ------------------------------- | -------: | -----------------:  | ----------: | ----------: | ------------: | -------------------: |
| Durability                      | 11 9’s   | 11 9’s              | 11 9’s      | 11 9’s      | 11 9’s        | 11 9’s               |
| Availability                    | 99.99%   | 99.99%              | 99.90%      | 99.50%      | N/A           | N/A                  |
| Availability SLA                | 99.99%   | 99.00%              | 99.00%      | 99.00%      | N/A           | N/A                  |
| AZ's                            | > 3      | > 3                 | > 3         | 1           | > 3           | > 3                  |
| Min. Capacity charge per object | N/A      | N/A                 | 128 KB      | 128 KB      | 40 KB         | 40 KB                |
| Min. Storage duration charge    | N/A      | 30 Days             | 30 Days     | 30 Days     | 90 days       | 180 days             |
| Retrieval fee                   | N/A      | N/A                 | Per GB      | Per GB      | Per GB        | Per GB               |
| First byte latency              | ms       | ms                  | ms          | ms          | mins to hours | hours                |

Key takeaways:

* One one-zone IA there should be lowered durability since there is a single point of failure, this value could actually refer to the infrastructure where our data is stored.
* We won't put an availability % on Glacier since retrieving content is so slow.
* First byte latency refers to how fast we can retrieve data from S3.

S3 Guarantees:

* The platform is build with 99.99% availability.
* Amazon guarantees 99.9 availability.
* Amazon guarantees 11'9s of durability.

## S3 Security

When we create a new bucket, they are all **private by default** and AWS really promotes not exposing buckets. Logging per request can be enabled in order to know which objects are being accessed and uploaded into our bucket, though logs are stored in a separate bucket. In S3 there are two security solutions:

* Access Control Lists: This is a legacy feature, though it's not deprecated, this is a very simple way for granting access to an object say public access or just read and write permissions.
* Bucket Policies: This is a more complex way of setting access policies since we need to write these policies into a JSON file.

### S3 Encryption

When we upload files to S3, we are using **SSL/TLS** by default, this means we have encryption for traffic between our local host and S3, for **Server Side Encryption** or SSE (this encrypts the data itself) there are a few options.

* SSE-AES: A 256 byte in length to be used in encryption, this is completely handled by S3.
* SSE-KMS or Key Managed: Keys are encrypted with another key, these keys can be managed by AWS or by us.
* SSE-C or Customer Provided: We provide the keys ourselves.

We can also encrypt our own files before uploading them to AWS, which is known as **Client Side Encryption**.

## S3 Data Consistency

When we put or write data to S3, which happens when we create new objects, the consistency is going to be different when we overwrite or delete objects.

### New Objects (PUTS)

When we send new data to S3 as a new object it's going to be *Read After Write* Consistency, this means that when upload a new S3 object we are immediately able to read the data, and it's going to be consistent.

### Overwrite (PUTS) or Delete Objects (DELETES)

When we overwrite or delete an existing object we deal with *Eventual Consistency*, which means that it takes time for S3 to replicate this changes to all AZ's, in this case, if we were to read the data after uploading it, S3 may return an old copy. We generally need to wait a few seconds before reading the new data.

## Cross Region Replication or CRR

When this feature is enable, any object that is uploaded will be **automatically replicated** to another region, this provides higher durability and disaster recovery for objects. 

![S3 CRR](https://i.imgur.com/Khd7xLV.png)

*Note:* It is also possible to copy an object into another S3 bucket in a separate account.

To enable CRR you must enable versioned on both the source and the destination buckets.

## Versioning

On S3 we can enable versioning on a bucket, this allows us to version our objects in order to prevent data loss and version tracking.

* Store all versions of an object in S3.
* Once enabled it cannot be disabled, only suspended.
* Fully integrates with S3's lifecycle rules.

![S3 Versioning](https://i.imgur.com/gVjullY.png)

*Note:* We are able to retrieve a specific object version.

## Lifecycle Management

This feature automates to process of moving objects between storage classes or deleting them completely. A simple use case would be:

* 7 days after uploading an object to S3 update an object class to the Glacier storage class, since we are unlikely to continue using it, this would save up on costs.
* 365 days after uploading an object to S3, remove it, since it's no longer needed.
 
![S3 Sample Lifecycle Rule](https://i.imgur.com/gVjullY.png)

## Transfer Acceleration

This feature provides us **fast and secure** transfer of files over long distances between end users and an S3 bucket, in here instead of uploading an object into an S3 bucket, you upload your data into a `distinct URL` for an **Edge Location** (a data center that is as close as possible). Once the data is uploaded the Edge Location, it is then forwarded through a specially optimized network (Amazon's backbone network)

![S3 Transfer Acceleration](https://i.imgur.com/rq2fw3i.png)

## Presigned URLs

This is a key feature when building web applications, this feature allows us to build a URL to provide temporary access to an object for either upload or download. These are commonly used to provide access to private objects, they can only be generated by the `AWS CLI` or the `AWS SDK`.

![S3 Presigned URL Example](https://i.imgur.com/79G7b5P.png)

## MFA Delete

To prevent other users from deleting our objects, we can enable MFA Delete which ensures users won't delete objects from a bucket unless they provide their MFA code. This feature may only be enabled if:

1. The AWS CLI is used to enable MFA.
2. The bucket must have versioning turned on.

```bash
aws s3api put-bucket-versioning \
    --bucket bucketname \
    --versioning-configuration Status=Enabled,MDADelete=Enabled \
    --mda "your-mda-serial-number mfa-code" \
```

*Note:* Only the bucket owner logged in as a Root user can delete objects from the bucket.

![S3 MFA](https://i.imgur.com/ygGpql3.png)

## Hands-On Key Takeaways

In order to make an object publicly accessible, you need to configure an ACL policy at `permissions > Bucket Policy > Edit`, here's a sample configuration for a single object.

```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "Allow object public access",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Principal": {
                "AWS": "*"
            },
            "Action": "s3:GetObject",
            "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::{bucket-name}/{objcet-path}"
        }
    ]
}
```

Versioning is a feature which cannot be turned off, only suspended, this means objects will still have a version history, but we won't be able to add new versions.

![S3 Enabling Versioning](https://i.imgur.com/IyxWFE3.png)

With versioning enabled, if we upload a new file with the same name as an existing object, S3 will detect it as a new version. The original version has no ID since versioning was disabled.

![S3 New Object Version](https://i.imgur.com/W3sXU6d.png)

When we upload a new file, they don't inherit the previous version's properties though our ACL does enable use to retrieve the latest version since the older versions have a `&version` query parameter on their path. We can also select a specific object version and delete it.

Server-side encryption only affect objects after it has been enabled, we will need to enable it on each pre-existing object, turning it on is a simple as visiting `Properties > Default Encryption > Edit`

![S3 Enable encryption](https://i.imgur.com/shU7ZaW.png)

## The AWS CLI for S3

The [AWS cli](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-welcome.html) enables us to interact with AWS'S services from the command line, before configuring it, make sure to create a [IAM User](https://console.aws.amazon.com/iamv2/home#/home) with programmatic access, then run `aws configure` and fill out the required inputs.

To list your available S3 Buckets use the following commands:

```bash
# List all the s3 buckets
$ aws s3 ls

2021-12-07 17:12:49 je12emy-csa-bucket

# Show the content at the root level for a given bucket
$ aws s3 ls je12emy-csa-bucket
                           PRE images/
# Show the content inside the folder 'images'
$ aws ls je12emy-csa-bucket/images/
2021-12-10 14:10:21          0
2021-12-10 16:37:53    2425730 space.png
2021-12-10 15:40:37     216708 vader.png
```

We can also move files from and into the bucket from s3.

```bash
# Download a file from S3
$ aws s3 cp s3://je12emy-csa-bucket/images/vader.png ~/Pictures/s3_vader.png
download: s3://je12emy-csa-bucket/images/vader.png to ../../Pictures/s3_vader.png
# Upload a file into S3
$ aws s3 cp ~/Pictures/mc.jpg s3://je12emy-csa-bucket-images/mc.jpj
```

Remember all objects are private by default, in order to provide temporary access to an object use the following command in order to generate a URL for it.

```bash
# Generate a temporary URL to a given object
$ aws s3 presign s3://je12emy-csa-bucket/images/mc.jpg --expires-in 300
https://je12emy-csa-bucket.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/images/mc.jpg?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Credential=AKIATN62CQAEGRLW5XCQ%2F20211223%2Fus-east-1%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20211223T201710Z&X-Amz-Expires=300&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Signature=de8dafc26779465f87f74c907c2c59fbd0bbbc7b5e89c8e4ccd98fe510d6eb82
```
